2000's
Iterated genetic engineering produces superintelligent saints who build the
first AGIs with the best human values.
Sublight expansion into the near Milky Way.
Energy is produced by nuclear fusion.
The typical human is a genetically engineered cyborg.
Venus, Mars, and dozens of exoplanets have started to be terraformed.
Quantum computing.
3000's
Space colonization shockwave approaches lightspeed.
Venus, Mars, and hundreds of exoplanets have been terraformed.
The typical human has all-synthetic cells.
Nanotechnology is ubiquitous.
4000's
Multiple Dyson spheres have been built.
Mind-weaving is viable.
Reactionless drives.
Voyager and Pioneer probes become centerpieces of great houses of worship.
Artificial black holes harnessed for energy.
5000's
Antimatter is the premiere source of power.
Interiors of stars are being colonized.
Sentience fully understood.
Practical lightspeed teleportation with a range of several AU.
Planet-sized spaceships.
6000's
Femtoportals allow faster-than-light communication.
Jupiter-sized spaceships.
Minds spanning hundreds of light-years.
Solar system-sized gigastructures made of exotic matter.
7000's
Macroportals. Stargate network.
Spacetime itself used as a computing substrate.
Stable strangelets and subatomic machinery.
Vacuum fluctuation energy. Not infnite, but very abundant, and with
interesting properties.
8000's
Artificial bubble universes.
Pioneering extradimensional exploration.
First contact with alien intelligence.
Planets made of shapeshifting, programmable matter.
9000's
Warp drive. True FTL.
Limits of Milky Way reached.
Warp-based telekinesis.
Mobile stars.
Supersystems formed from the combined matter of thousands of stellar
systems.
N-dimensional computing.
Pan-galactic coordination to find a solution to entropy.
10,000's
Type III civilization.
Andromeda Galaxy reached.
Entropy defeated.
Protonic fusion.
Mindkind extends over millions of lightyears and dozens of dimensions,
with ever-growing quantity and density of matter, energy, and other things.
11,000's
Virtual worlds experiment with lots and lots of dimensions of time.
Dwarf galaxy-ships travel the universe finding alien biospheres with
sentient life, protecting them from nonvoluntary suffering, uplifting them,
and welcoming those who wish to join to the intergalactic community.
Project begins to gather enough data from FTL sensors to resurrect the dead.
A huge range of new minds are created, including many formerly fictional
characters.
Many of the more alien new minds claim broad regions of space for themselves.
12,000's
Total computing power is so vast you have to be posthuman to begin to
understand its size, let alone its abilities.
Human, animal, and (discovered) alien dead are brought back to life.
A significant fraction of sapients ascend to hypersentience without
returning information.

13,000-13,284

