-------------------------
MapEd 2.0 Release Edition
-------------------------

I) Intro to Maped 2.0
II) Running Maped 2.0
 A) Moving within Maped
 B) Selection modes
    i) Layer Modes
       a) Tile Layers
  	  *) TileEd
       b) Special Layers
III) Our friend the Program Menu
 A) Save/Load Functions
 B) Map Properties
 C) Layers
 D) Options 
 E) Fun Crap(tm)
    i) MOD Player
    ii) CD Player
    iii) Columns
IV) Miscellaneous
    i) Bug Fixes

I) Intro to Maped 2.0
---------------------
MapEd 2.0 is essentially the same program as the one users had grown accustomed
to with V1 but with significant enhancement and miscellaneous Fun Crap(tm). 
If you are unfamiliar with MapEd, it can be described as the "heart" of VERGE. 
Most of elements that will be seen by the player in terms of characters (entities)
and backgrounds (tiles) will be setup within MapEd. 

Some of the most notable features of MapEd 2.0 are the windows-like enhancements;
Dialog boxes can be dragged by their title bars and text boxes can be advanced
with 'Tab'.

Items added since the beta release are annoted with '***'

I) Running Maped 
----------------
MapEd can be run from the command line simply as 'maped' or with the 
specification of a map. (i.e. 'maped vospram1.map')

MapEd 2.0 can be started without an additional map parameter, unlike its 
predecessor, to load a blank map and vsp. This has been stabalized from previous 
betas to load the default palette. Once inside the program, use the mouse to scroll 
around the map by moving it to the borders of the screen or use the cardinal 
direction keys.

A) Moving within MapEd
 
You can scroll the map a screen at a time by using one of the quick scroll keys:

Page Up   - Up
Page Down - Down
End       - Right
Home      - Left

You can summon the mini-map (just what the name implies) by pressing 'M'. 
Move the white screen outline to a portion of the map and click to move there 
quickly. 
Pressing 'Escape' while in the mini-map mode will return to MapEd without moving 
the screen.

B) Selection Modes

At the bottom of the main MapEd screen is are boxes indicating the current 
layers of the map. To the lower right is the information HUD for that layer.


i) Layer Modes

a) Tile Layers 
The numbers located in the lower left portion of the main MapEd screen are the 
tile layers available. (see the layers section of the menu chapter for instructions 
for adding new tile layers)

Pressing the corresponding keyboard shortcut or clicking on a number shown in these 
boxes will toggle that tile layer's visibility and its background will become red to 
indicate that it is visible. (When switching to the special layers, all available 
tile layers will be shown.) 
While you can press a layer's number to make it immediately visable, you must click 
on it or press "shift+layer number" in order to hide it.

When one or more of the tile layers is selected, two tile boxes will appear in the 
lower right portion of the screen to indicate the tile assigned to each mouse 
button. The left box is assigned to the left mouse button while the right is assigned 
to the right mouse button. (I hope your head isn't hurting, yet) 

Pressing 'Ctrl' while in the tile layer editing mode, will cause the 
'Maped 2.0 Tile Selector' to pop-up. Basically the same as ME1, simply press up or 
down or mouse scroll through the VSP and click on a tile to select with the mouse 
button you wish to assign it to.

While in tile layer editing mode, A/Z will change the tile assigned to the left 
button and S/X will change the tile assigned tot the right. 
The former letter scrolls forward through the VSP while the latter scrolls back.
Also while in tile layer editing mode, clicking on a tile while holding '/' will 
assign that tile to the chosen mouse button. (Also, pressing 'H' will toggle tile
highlighting.)

Back to the Tile Selector, the buttons seen on the panel at the bottom of the 
screen are somewhat self explanatory.

-Add Tiles adds the specified number of blank tiles to the end of the vsp.

-Animation (can be called with 'V') brings up a dialog box showing an animation 
 specified in the vsp. The Up/Down keys change the shown animation, while the 
 text boxes across from it alter the shown animation's traits. Start and End 
 are the animation's starting and ending tiles (Animations must be tiles in 
 sequential order in the vsp.), Delay is the amount of time in milliseconds 
 between each frame (100ms = 1 second), and mode is the animation's display 
 mode. (0 = Linear(normal); 1 = Reverse; 2 = Random; 3 = Loop Back and Forth)

-Import PCX/Import VSP are used to pilfer tiles from an existing image or 
 tileset respectively. Import PCX is more complicated in that you are prompted
 to choose whether or not the imported image is a tileset or an image. If the 
 pcx is set up as a tileset (with 1 pixel padding) then import it as a tileset.
 If appears as a normal image, import it as such.
 ***When selecting tiles to import, those which have already been imported will 
 appear with a grey mask. You can still import multiple copies of each tile, but 
 the masks will keep track. Pressing 'B' will build a list of imported tiles, 
 automatically greying duplicates which already exist in the VSP. 'N' will 
 import all non-existing tiles within the image to the VSP, while 'A' imports 
 them all, regardless.

-H/P toggles tile selector highlighting and tile padding respectively. Tile 
 padding adds or removes a 1 pixel border in between tiles to make them more
 distinguished.

-Select/Edit modes determine what happens when you click on a tile. In 'Select 
 Mode' the selected tile is assigned to that button as previously mentioned, 
 unlike 'Edit Mode' which causes TileEd to be launched and the selected tile to
 be loaded. You can also enter edit mode by pressing 'E' with the cursor over the 
 tile to edit.

While in the Tile Selector with the cursor positioned over a tile you wish to 
copy, press 'Ctrl+C' to copy that tile onto the clipboard. If you wish to carbon
copy the tile onto another, position the cursor over the tile you wish to overlay
and press 'Ctrl+S'. If you only want to paste the non-0 color portions of the 
tile, press 'Ctrl+T'.

To delete a tile entirely from the VSP, postion the cursor over it and press 
'Ctrl+D'. If you accidently delete an important tile from your VSP by mistake,
you can reload the map it to recover the lost tile. Also, be warned that the tiles
are recognized by number and as such, deleting a single tile will cause the 
following tiles to move one number higher. This will seriously screw up your maps,
so be careful. A work around is to delete the tile then insert a blank one in its
place to be used later. 
***The Super Delete function, 'ctrl+alt+d' will alter the map information so that 
all of the deleted tile's instances on the map will be replaced with the default,
rather than creating a big mess.

To insert a blank tile into the vsp, position the cursor over the tile
you want to add the blank one before and press 'Ctrl+I'. 
***Similar to Super Delete, Super Insert, 'ctrl+alt+i' will insert a blank
tile while reassigning the current tiles to their original artwork.

***Note*** Do not super delete or insert too quickly, do it slow and
rhythmically... i know it sounds stupid but for some reason, doing it too fast
messes things up.

X/Y/Z- X and Y will mirror chosen tile upon the pressed key's related axis. 'X' for 
instance, will flip the tile left to right, 'Y' will flip it up and down.
'Z' however, will turn the tile 90 degrees clockwise.

*) TileEd 

TileEd primary method of drawing tiles, and has improved exponetially from ME1.
Most of the manipulation functions are self-explanatory or ported similarly from
ACE, but there are a few new features.	Key shortcuts are courtesy of Ric:

CTRL/S + mouse click - (over edit window) Pick up colour under mouse
SPACEBAR    - toggle between draw mode and select mode
CTRL+Z or U - one level undo
CTRL+A      - select all
CTRL+U      - unselect all
CTRL+C      - copy selected area
CTRL+X      - cut selected area
CTRL+V      - paste
DEL         - clears selected area
CTRL+R      - reverts the tile to the original (like undo in maped 1)
G           - toggles grid on/off
H           - toggles hilight on/off
M           - toggles mask on/off
I           - inverts mask
X           - mirrors image
Y           - flips image 
L/R         - Rotates tile 90 degrees anti-clockwise/clockwise
Q/W         - Steps through animation (in tile edit mode) if any
A/Z and S/X - changes the left or right drawing colours
PGUP/PGDN   - Colour shift up/down
[ and ]     - toggle screen resolutions
ALT+X       - quits to DOS (Note: This doesn't prompt you to save nor does 
              it save automatically at the moment. It just dumps you 
              straight to DOS)

b) Special Layers
The letters adjacent to the tile layers in the lower left portion indicate the 
map's special layers as follows:

O - Obstructions 
----------------
Areas the main character and designated entities cannot enter. When editing in 
layer mode, you simply left click the area upon which you wish to add an 
obstruction or right click to remove it.

N - Zones
---------
Zones are triggers that link to events in the map's vc code of which there may be 
a maximum of 256 per map.
Pressing A/Z scrolls through the available zones (or shift-clicking a zone to 
adopt it), and pressing 'ctrl' will bring up the zone info box for the active zone. 

Name: A description of the zone for the creator's use alone. The player will 
      never see it.

Script: This is the number of the event in the map's vc code that will be called 
        when the player successfully activated the zone.

Chance: This value determines whether the zone will be activated by determining 
        the randomness of success.  A value of 0 will cause the event never to occur 
        (unless over-ridden by Adjacent Activation) while 256 (the maximum) will 
        cause it never to fail.

Delay: A value of 0 is assigned to the chance of the zone before this number of 
       steps have been taken within the zone. From then, the Chance it returned to 
       the default you've set and calculated normally. For instance, on a map if the 
       chance of incurring a random battle is 50%, and the delay s 10, a minimum 
       of 10 steps must be taken after each battle before another may occur. 

Entity: This specifies a script number to be executed when an entity enters the zone. 
        0 means no script.

Allow Adjacent Activation: If this is checked, then the player may stand in an 
      adjacent tile and while facing the zone, activate it with the 'Talk/Confirm' 
      button. This over-rides the chance factor.

E - Entities
------------
Entities are generally the characters that roam your maps but can become more dynamic 
if you so choose. In entity editing mode, clicking on a blank space on the map creates 
an entity doppelganger there and assigns it the lowest untaken entity number. Pressing 
'Del' while the cursor is over an entity will prompt you to erase that entity. When 
done so, that entity and it's properties will be gone and the next numbered entity 
with become one number lower and so on. (i.e. Deleting Entity0 on a map will cause 
Entity1 to become Entity0 and Entity2 to become Entity1, etc)

Clicking on an existing entity will call that character's information dialog box.
(Pressing Up/Down while in this box will scroll through the available entities.)
The entity properties include a description (for your benefit alone), the XY 
coordinated of the entity (which are useful when you want to move a single entity 
without disrupting the whole order of your entities by deleting one), the number of 
the chr (as referenced to the chr list (see below) which may be accessed by a button 
adjacent to the chr text box), the speed of the entity (see Appendix A), and the 
activation script called when the entity is activated.

Pressing the 'CHR list' from the entity properties box will bring up a listing of 
chrs that may be used in the map. Clicking on an empty text box to enter the chrs 
name with the attached extention, or choose browse to search for the file locally.

Once the chr for the entity has been chosen, the appropriate chr will be displayed in 
the upper right corner of the property box.

The addtional boxes control:

-Autoface- Causes entity to face the player when "activated."

-Active/Adjacent Method- If active, the entity will be activated when faced and 
 "talked to" by the player. In Adjacent mode, it is activated as soon as the player 
 comes in contact with it by occupying the space adjacent to it.

-Obstructable/Obstruction- If the entity is obstructable, it will be stopped as the 
 player would by map obstruction. If obstruction is unchecked, the player will be 
 able to walk through the entity. (useful for flying chrs or invisible trigger chrs)

Below these are the Movement Code/Scripts for the entity which control its movement 
behaviour in the game.

The MoveCodes are:
0 - Stopped
1 - Causes the entity to roam aimlessly the specified number of steps before 
    pausing for the specified delay.
2 - Causes the entity only to wander within a specified area.
3 - Causes the entity to wander within a specified zone.
4 - Causes the entity to enact a movement script specified in the 'scripts box'. 
    (see below)

If you select 4, fill in the last text box with the *number* of the movement script
you wish the entity to use, not the actual movement code. 

Scripts: This button brings up a list of the predefined scripts for the entities to 
follow. Using Up/Down you can find the numbered slot to fill in the movement script 
using a letter followed by the value of the direction. 

The letters are: 
U - Up
D - Down
L - Left
R - Right
X - Move to X axis value
Y - Move to Y axis value
Z - Special Frame
F - Face (See Appendix B)
W - Wait

If you wanted the entity to move up two spaces, left 1, then move to 21 on the X axis, 
face down, pause for one second, and display its 22nd frame then repeat, you would use:

 U2L1X21F0B

III) The Program Menu
---------------------
The program menu is the most crucial and integral part of MapEd 2.0. How else would you 
get to Columns? It can be called by pressing 'Esc' or (if you have a three-button mouse)
with the middle (or third bound) mouse button within the main editing window. 

A) New/Save/Load Functions

Using 'New MAP' from the menu will abort the current map (after a prompt) and begin
an blank map and VSP. In order to use an existing VSP with the new map, you must enter
one in the MAP properties (see below) or use the 'Import VSP' function from the tile 
selector.

The Save/Load features are fairly obvious; Pressing 'F10' or accessing 'Save MAP' from 
the menu will save the map contents including the VSP, map contents and it will compile
the map's VC code into the map itself. 
***Saving a new VSP does so in a compressed format, although Maped2 and the engine can 
load older, uncompressed VSP formats. Maps must be resaved in order to be used, however.
-If you save a New MAP generated from the menu or one generated if maped is run without 
a map parameter, it will automatically be saved as "untitled.map" with "untitled.vsp"
Load will bring up a Load Map Dialog box. Either enter the map's name (with .map 
extention) or press the 'Browse' button to search for the map locally. You will be 
prompted to save the current map before it is aborted.

Save VSP will save just the VSP independant of the map and entailing information. 
Useful if you were to create a few nice tiles, yet accidently delete a layer.

B) MAP properties

This dialog box is used to enter the important map information and the map resize 
function. 

-Music:   This is the initial music file that will be played upon map startup.
-VSP:     The VSP this map will use. Note that if you use the same VSP for multiple 
          maps, all alterations made to it will affect ALL of its maps.
-Rstring: This indicates the order and display values of the layers. (see below) The 
          order of the the layer numbers determines in which order they will be 
          displayed. Also, the letter 'E' should be added in order to determine upon 
          which layer they will be shown. Additionally, you may add an 'R' to 
          determine where to display a hookretrace script or you may define a specific 
          script begun with an 'S' followed by the script number appended with an 'X'. 
          Therefore, if you had four map layers, the obligatory entities drawn on the 
          first layer and script 3 to drawn over all the other layers, your Rstring 
          would look like: 1E234S3X

-MAP Resize:
 This calls a box used to edit the X/Y sizes of the map. Just enter the new values and 
 press 'Resize'.

C) Layers:
 Layers are a somewhat complicated aspect of your map. Accessing 'Layers' on the 
 program menu calls a submenu which is used to add or edit existing map layers.
 'Add Layer' will generate a new layer for the map. After adding it to the 
 Rstring (IIIb), you can then add tiles to it as you would the other layers. 'Edit
 Layer' allows you to edit the layer properties including parallax and 
 h-line/transparency. The parallax values alter the movement of the layers in 
 accordance with the party's movement. The X/Y multipliers alter the direction of the
 layer opposite to the party while the divider does vice versa. Keep in mind that
 these are multipliers and dividers, hence, are fractions so an x multiplier and 
 divider of 20 reduces to 1/1 and cancels movement.
 'Import Image' directly crops all tiles from an image and places them in proper order
 directly onto a selected layer. If the selected layer has tiles currently on it, that 
 information will discarded. ***The checkbox 'Eliminate Duplicates' will not crop and 
 tiles that are identical to ones already a part of the vsp, instead substituting the
 original when they are actually imported.
-Destroyer: 
 Destroys specific elements entirely from the map. Destroying Zones will get rid of 
 the physical placement of the zones while destroying zone data will eliminate the 
 information about the zones from the zone's property box. You can also eliminate
 all entities and obstructions with destroyer.

D) Options
Most of these values are self explanatory; You can toggle smooth scrolling as opposed 
to tile based scrolling, mouse scrolling, whether you cursor will have a white tile 
outline and alternate between graphics modes. 
You can also set the color of the window title bar, box background, highlight color, 
and white offset color. 
The window color options are based on the numbers of the currently active palette.

E) Fun Crap (tm)

These are some assorted throw ins that are determined to throw all sorts of road 
blocks in front of you as you attempt to concentrate. 

i) MOD Player
This is a simple interface for loading MOD, XM, or S3M music file. In the future it 
may be used for playing ITs as well. Simply enter the name of the music file or 
browse for it locally and press play.

ii) CD Player
This feature is capable of loading and playing CD music tracks. Unfortunately, it has 
some issues conflicting with Windows' Auto-Load and CD-Player.

iii) Columns
If you want to know the real reason V2 was delayed, look no further. The great spanning
abyss of wasted time, this is Columns!
In case you've never played the original SEGA classic, the object of Columns is to align
three of the same colored crystals (orbs) and they will disappear. 
Pressing 'Up' will alternate the colors of the orbs, and Left/Right move the stack 
accordingly. Press 'Down' to accelerate the stack.

To change the difficulty setting, alter the 'difficulty' variable in MAPED.CFG (found at 
the end of maped.cfg) 

(Courtesy of vecna:)
The difficulty levels are as follows:
       4 - Normal
       5 - Harder
       6 - Your death is assured. ^_^

     The difficulty controls not how fast the blocks fall, but how many
     different colors of blocks are on the playing field. A value of greater
     than 6 will error the program, and a difficulty less than 4 is outright
     cheating. If you ever LOSE with a difficulty less than 4 you have
     serious problems.
  
 You can now skin the background and sprite graphics for Columns. The
 default is still hardcoded into the EXE, however, if the external files
 COLBACK.PCX and/or COLSPR.PCX are found, they will be used. You can
 download the default skin from www.verge-rpg.com, and other graphic sets can
 be found at Extended Play. 
 (http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~rwkl97/ep/download.html#me2skins)

iv) Quitting!
Accessing 'Exit to DOS' from the main menu or 'Alt+X' will quit to DOS.

IV) Miscellaneous
-----------------
***'F11' will take a proper screen shot, making the 'prntscrn' method obsolete.
 Map movement has been retooled so that it will scroll independant of CPU speed.
 
There are a few other features such as the trippy built-in screen saver that are
left for you to uncover. ^_^

*) Various Fixes  
----------------
(From whatsnew.txt in Maped Beta 3)
  - Out-of-Bounds rendering protections reintroduced to the map renderer.
    These were originally in ME2 a while ago, but somehow along the line
    they got lost while juggling around different copies of the source.
    This should prevent ME2 from crashing even if a mapfile or VSP is
    partially corrupt.
  - Fixed a problem with an internal tileset helper array not being
    updated if you loaded a map from the commandline, resulting in the
    map being drawn erratically.
  - Problems with the sound system crashing the DOS box if sound
    couldn't be initialized fixed. Now you just won't hear sound if
    there are problems; The only reason ME2 should crash on startup
    now is 1) you're running Windows NT or 2) you need to use the
    nocdaudio option in MAPED.CFG
  - Increased the tilebay size from 2048 tiles to 10240 tiles.
  - Some improvements have been made with the CD audio situation; Exiting
    ME2 will no longer stop the CD playback unless you used the ME2 CD
    player. This was causing problems with people who were using Windows
    CD Player to listen to CDs while going in and out of MapEd, which could
    get very annoying. ^_^ It's still not perfect tho.

***The map movement clipping has been fixed so you can now access every tile 
in the map.

***Maped2 won't crash and burn hardcode if your map is less than the screen
size. Not that you shouldn't have maps less than the screen size, but if you're
stupid and try it, it'll handle it. 
This will become an issue with the multi-res versions of Maped.

========================================================================================

Appendix A: Entity/Character Speeds
-----------------------------------
  Speed  Pixels/second
    1      25
    2      33
    3      50
    4      100
    5      200
    6      300
    7      400
The default speed of the main character is 4.

Appendix B: Face direction values
---------------------------------

          1-Up
           |
 2-Left   - -     3-Right
           |
         0-Down

